# Use Cases

* ****[**Add end-to-end encryption to any client and server application**](add-end-to-end-encryption-to-any-client-and-server-application.md): An application service and an application client running in two private networks wish to communicate with each other without exposing ports on the Internet.&#x20;
* ****[**Build End-to-End Encryption with Rust**](https://github.com/build-trust/ockam/blob/develop/documentation/use-cases/end-to-end-encryption-with-rust#readme): In this hands-on guide, we create two small Rust programs called Alice and Bob. Alice and Bob send each other messages, over the network, via a cloud service. They mutually authenticate each other and have a cryptographic guarantee that the integrity, authenticity, and confidentiality of their messages is protected end-to-end.
* ****[**Build End-to-End Encryption through Kafka**](https://github.com/build-trust/ockam/blob/develop/documentation/use-cases/end-to-end-encryption-through-kafka#readme): In this guide, we show two programs called Alice and Bob. Alice and Bob send each other messages, over the network, via a cloud service, _through Kafka_. They mutually authenticate each other and have a cryptographic guarantee that the integrity, authenticity, and confidentiality of their messages is protected end-to-end. The Kafka instance, the intermediary cloud service and attackers on the network are not be able to see or change the contents of en-route messages. The application data in Kafka is encrypted.&#x20;
* ****[**How to end-to-end encrypt all application layer communication**](https://github.com/build-trust/ockam/blob/develop/documentation/use-cases/end-to-end-encrypt-all-application-layer-communication#readme): In this hands-on guide, we'll create two simple Rust programs to **transparently tunnel** arbitrary application layer communication through Ockam's end-to-end encrypted, mutually authenticated secure channels. These example programs are also available in a docker image so you can try them without setting up a rust toolchain.
* ****[**Build a secure access tunnel to a service in a remote private network**](https://github.com/build-trust/ockam/blob/develop/documentation/use-cases/secure-remote-access-tunnels#readme): In this guide, we'll write a few simple Rust programs to programmatically create secure access tunnels to remote services and devices that are running in a private network, behind a NAT. We'll then tunnel arbitrary communication protocols through these secure tunnels.
* ****[**Step-by-Step Deep Dive**](https://github.com/build-trust/ockam/blob/develop/documentation/guides/rust#readme): In this step-by-step guide we write many small rust programs to understand the various building blocks that make up Ockam. We dive into Node, Workers, Routing, Transport, Secure Channels and more.

