---
description: >-
  Ockam Identities are unique, cryptographically verifiable digital identities.
  These identities authenticate by proving possession of secret keys. Ockam
  Vaults safely store these secret keys.
---

# Identities and Vaults

In order to make decisions about trust, we must authenticate senders of messages.

## Vault

Ockam [Identities](identities.md#identity) authenticate by cryptographically proving possession of specific secret keys.  Ockam Vaults safely store these secret keys in cryptographic hardware and cloud key management systems.

You can create a vault as follows:&#x20;

```
» ockam vault create v1
Vault created: v1
```

This command will, by default create a file system based vault, where your secret keys are stored at a specific file path.

Vaults are designed to be used in way that secret keys never have to leave vault. There is a growing base of Ockam Vault implementations in the [<mark style="color:blue;">Ockam Github Repository</mark>](https://github.com/build-trust/ockam) that safely store secret keys in specific KMSs, HSMs, Secure Enclaves etc.

## Identity

Ockam Identities are unique, cryptographically verifiable digital identities.

You can create new identities, by typing: &#x20;

```
» ockam identity create i1 --vault v1
Identity created: Pf87c30a63cd56b4848ed0aa17d582db67fe143279b37e6af1eb460f020685f41
```

The secret keys belonging to this identity are stored in the specified vault. This can be any type of vault - File Vault, AWS KMS, Azure KeyVault, YubiKey etc. If no vault is specified, the default vault is used. If a default vault doesn't exist yet, a new file systems based vault is created, set as default, and then used to generate secret keys.

To ensure privacy and eliminate the possibility of correlation of behavior across trust contexts, we've made it easy to generate and use different identities and identifiers for separate trust contexts.

### Secret Keys

Each Ockam Identity starts its life by generating a secret key and its corresponding public key. Secret keys, must remain secret, while public keys can be shared with the world.

Ockam Identities support two types of Elliptic Curve secret keys that live in vaults - Curve25519 or NIST P-256.

### Identifier

Each Ockam Identity has a unique public identifier, called the <mark style="color:orange;">Ockam Identifier</mark> of this identity:

```
» ockam identity show i1
Pa01e2743aab9f321c3daed3312750f38c88e4f0b37256470b663b1bbb2a6c1a1
```

This Identifier is generated by truncating the first public key of the Identity.

### Change History

Ockam Identities can periodically rotate their keys to indicate that the latest public key is the one that should be used for authentication. Each Ockam Identity maintains a self signed change history of key rotation events, you can see this full history by running:

```
» ockam identity show i1 --full
Change History:
  Change[0]:
    identifier: 5291036cb4d1bfcfb16e4dbc66379eace59598be8500aaf5aca80454cb7b83c4
    change:
      prev_change_identifier: 0547c93239ba3d818ec26c9cdadd2a35cbdf1fa3b6d1a731e06164b1079fb7b8
      label:        OCKAM_RK
      public_key:   Ed25519 d7ea55504402126fac0df91c64abd7838da9add21e9c8a5ee9687c861620b6e5
    signatures:
      [0]: SelfSign c9733663024bcb0ef0cc8e8989d25d459f8dc76881efb7d153b89bd555170c96acf5a4228f710fb4ad28caf6bdfdc3aaafc93bfabeb0b558f9a802aeafdcf407
```

### Identifier Authentication

Authentication, within Ockam, starts by proving control of a specific Ockam Identifier. To prove control of specific Identifier the prover must present the identifier, the full signed change history of the identifier, and a signature on a challenge using the latest public key in the identifier's change history.

{% hint style="info" %}
If you’re stuck or have questions at any point, [<mark style="color:blue;">please reach out to us</mark>](https://www.ockam.io/contact)<mark style="color:blue;">**.**</mark>
{% endhint %}

Next, let's learn how to create mutually authenticated and end-to-end encrypted [<mark style="color:blue;">secure channels</mark>](secure-channels.md) that guarantee data authenticity, integrity, and confidentiality.
